[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> So Tracy, we are recording this on
Thursday, August 21st. We are here at
Jackson Hall. I need to note at the
beginning, we were recording this before
the big Paulo speech. I don't really
think it matters too much because that's
But I just want to like get that out of
the way. A little timing context for an
econ
>> conference. We're not going to talk
about that speech for obvious reasons.
We don't know what's going to be said.
But what we can talk about is the
economy right now. That's not going to
change between, you know, right now and
tomorrow morning. Hopefully
>> whenever this comes out, probably it's
not going to change much. But, you know,
we've been very lucky lately. We've been
talking to a lot of uh regional Fed
presidents and it's really cool that we
have access to that.
>> Yes. And it's good to get a range of
opinions as well because as we've been
discussing,
>> the economy does look very uncertain
right now and you could make a case for
everything from a rate cut to holding to
possibly even maybe hiking uh which you
know Jeff Schmidt kind of alluded to
when we interviewed him.
>> Yeah. No, it was pretty extraordinary
that like look, you could make a point
that stock markets near record highs,
credit spreads near record lows,
employment uh low, and inflation still
warm. Why are we talking about rate
cuts? Anyway, we got to keep getting
more takes and perspectives on this from
the people who actually think about this
the best. And uh we
>> do we get a prize if we interview every
Fed president?
>> Well, we should try. There's got to
there should be a name for that. But we
have a guest, perfect guest, someone
we've talked to on the podcast before.
very excited to have live here in
Jackson Hall, past Oddlot's guest, uh,
Chicago Fed President Austin Goulsby.
So, Austin, thank you so much. I'm gonna
give you a prize. Now, I drove here. I
just got here. I just got in an hour and
a half ago.
>> I believe that I've driven the farthest
of anybody to get here. And one of the
things I did on the way was finish my
50th state, North Dakota. Oh, and it
turns out there's a a lot of people
North Dakota is their last state and
there's officially a club called the
Best for Last Club and I joined the Best
for Last Club. So, who's going to be
your 12th Reserve Bank president? You're
going to get a prize.
>> Congratulations. I saw your road trip
like on Twitter. I saw that you were
posting. So,
>> there are some amazing national parks on
the on the way.
>> We have a great country, don't we?
>> Yeah, we got amazing country.
How's the economy looking to you these
days?
>> Well, it depends which direction you're
facing. As you know, I thought for Q1
coming into April, it was looking pretty
good. We had a stable full employment,
the unemployment rate a little above
four. inflation while having been above
the target for four years
looked to me like it was heading it was
coming down and down and down and was
headed to 2%.
>> And so I thought reasonable
approximation
rates need to start heading down to
where we think they're going to settle
which is a fair bit below where where we
were then where we are today.
Then we go through some bumps. I've
heard of them. Threw a bunch of dirt in
the air. all of this stuff that it's
like is the economy still where it was
in January, February, March, or are we
on some different path?
I still closet hope slash think that
we're where we were before and that
tariffs, imported goods are only 11% of
GDP. Mhm.
>> If they'll kind of stay in their lane,
if we don't keep escalating them, if we
don't willy-nilly apply them to
intermediate goods so that they turn
into higher cost of production,
it'd probably be okay. And we had a
couple of months of benign inflation
numbers and then we got the last
inflation number which is a little less
benign and the rise of services
inflation threw me for a little bit of a
cross current. So I'd say I've still got
one eye on inflation. We're now 4 and
1/2 years above the target. It's one
thing to be four and a half years above
the target, but we're still clearly
trending down. Yeah. If we start
trending up and you start seeing
inflation rising in non-tariff affected
categories like what we saw in services,
then I'm going to get a little more
nervous on that side. And on the job
side, I still feel like we're something
like stable full employment. The
revisions, they are concerning. We also
know that the labor supply and
population growth when there's big
immigration things happening
add a lot of noise to just monthly
payroll. So I don't want to overindex on
that. I want to take multiple measures.
The four horsemen of truth and justice
in my view are rates. They're less
susceptible to the immigration and
population labor supply problems.
They're the unemployment rate, the
hiring rate, the layoff rate, the
vacancy rate. If you look at those
rates, three of them still say this is
basically full employment and it's
looking fine. It looks very similar to
2018 2019, a strong job market. The
hiring rate is low. And if you talk to
parents of kids graduating from college,
you hear it's tough.
>> It's tough to get a job. We're in a low
separations, low hiring environment, but
that might be full employment. Okay? So
that's why I say I don't come to it
averse to cutting of rates. If we get
through this and we can get some stuff
settled on the tariff side, we might
easily still be on the golden path. It
might still make perfect sense to keep
going down, but we've just got a couple
of flags at the same time.
>> I think you just hit all of our talking
points in that one question. Thank you
for coming out.
>> We will dig into all these things, but
just before we do, I have one question.
Maybe it's a bit like asking um someone
who their favorite child is, but what's
occupying most of your headsp space at
the moment?
>> I thought you were about to say Chicago
is your favorite bank and I was going to
say good choice. Good choice.
>> No. Is it inflation or the labor market?
What are you thinking most about?
>> I'd say inflation.
>> I'm still thinking inflation. If we had
four benign months of inflation that
looked like those kind of early ones,
that would have helped me be much more
comfortable with the idea. It's not
going to be, you know, tariffs stayed in
their 11% lane. People aren't freaking
out. It's going to be fine. Let's just
go think about the employment side now
that we seeing a couple of bumps and
things ticking up. I fear we gotta we
got to think about that inflation side
just given what the history was. If we
were having this discussion in 2019 and
we hadn't had the team transitory and
the argu the very same arguments like no
no this a one-time thing and so the
inflation should just go away real
quickly. If that we hadn't had that, I
would be much more comfortable making
that argument. But now that I don't even
like using that word.
>> Plus, everyone has experienced inflation
now.
>> Everyone's experienced. So, they're more
hyped up. They're more amped up. Not
hyped up. They're they're amped up to
see it. And look, you see this consumer
confidence numbers going down somewhat
significantly. survey measures of
inflation expectations, which I in
fairness always said I put less weight
on than market-based measures. That
said, I don't put zero weight on them.
And if you see people in surveys ask,
"What do you think inflation is going to
be over the next one year, two years,
now even longer, they're saying it's
higher." So, we we got to think about
that. You mentioned those labor market
revisions and when we got that last jobs
report it was mediocre but even more
than mediocre was those it was the pull
down of the prior two months and it
there's actually strikes me as two ways
of looking at this. One is oh you know
what the labor market is really
decelerating that probably we have to
have cut soon if we want to hold on to
full employment. But there's another
take that actually has come up in a
couple of recent episodes which is well
yeah that was the postappril 2nd
volatility. We're through that now that
actually we have more tariff certainty
than we we certainly have more tariff
certainty than we did. That was maybe
the trough. We got a S&P flash PMI today
that actually showed a positive
employment rating. This came up in our
conversation with Jeff Schmid who's
throwing this event for the Kansas City
Fed that maybe that was the cyclical low
for the year just though that the
craziness of those couple months.
>> Fascinating. I thought you were going to
go totally different way.
>> So those are two schools of thought both
of which are premised on
using monthly payroll as an indicator of
where we are in the business cycle. And
in normal times, that's perfectly
appropriate. My third category is at
moments when there are population growth
shifts. Yeah.
>> And labor supply, especially from
immigration, be careful using monthly
payroll
for the business cycle. That wasn't for
that wasn't one of because And I have no
is it remorse? Not remorse. I have no I
don't feel guilty talking about this
topic now because you can go back and
look a year and a half ago and more when
we were getting jobs numbers that were
far higher than what we thought the
break even was. There was a one group
that was saying we're about to have
inflation kick way back up because
180,000 jobs a month is faster than
break even. break even is like 85,000 a
month. So, we're overheating. And at
that time, I said,
>> not pay no attention, but pay less
attention than you normally would
payroll and jobs numbers say because we
know there's a whole bunch of
immigration that's happening behind the
scenes that is not showing up yet. Now,
when we look back, everybody says, "Oh,
yeah, obviously that's why we generate
as many jobs."
This is just the exact same idea but in
reverse. Now it may prove not to be
true.
This might be an indicator of the
business cycle but we learned the last
time around that those four horsemen of
truth were rates not aggregates. Okay.
So if you don't know what the population
growth rate is or if it's different than
what you expected, be extra suspicious
about total payroll employment and total
GDP growth. So if you started to see GDP
growth overall is slowing down, but the
components don't really suggest that or
if you start seeing payroll growth, you
characterize it as mediocre. I don't
think it was like 75,000. That's right
around the break even.
>> If you're 75,000 plus or minus a
100,000, which is normally what you are
for monthly payroll,
you're going to get months where you
have low payroll. And then if you add
this immigration thing on top of it,
like I say, I'm not saying ignore it.
I'm just saying be very careful. I was a
little not puzzled but I was a little
concerned that the market reaction
seemed to be
let's take our understanding of monthly
payroll numbers circa 2018
>> and say that must mean we're on the
verge of recession. Right?
>> If that's where your head is
>> that you say well a low monthly payroll
in the past has been an indicator of the
beginning of recession.
Then you got to explain why these other
ones don't show that. Why is the layoff
rate as low as it is? You have you
haven't seen an uptick in layoffs. The
vacancy rate is actually rising a little
and is better than it was in 2019. I
think so. This doesn't look like a
normal business cycle yet. If it starts
to, I'll be the first one saying this is
what re the beginning of a recession
looks like. So the idea is that weaker
payrolls can be offset or are being
offset by weaker labor supply because
we're getting less immigration. So the
break even rate is
>> that the break even is lower.
>> Yeah. Okay. You mentioned the market
reaction just then. Can we talk a little
bit more about the market because as Joe
mentioned, you know, stocks are still
kind of near their record highs. I know
they've been falling a bit this week.
Credit spreads at like a 27-year low. I
still hear Fed officials talk about
rates being restrictive even though
inflation is still above target. But
when I look at the market, when I look
at financial conditions, it doesn't look
that restrictive to me.
>> Look, be careful. We're just in the
weird glass onion version of the same
discussions we've been having for
several years now that I've been in the
Fed. I'm coming on three years. At that
time it was positive supply shocks and
the whole question was are we about to
reoverheat?
Do we need to maintain do we need to
keep raising? Do we need to maintain the
rates this high or can we start cutting?
I kind of think that a large component
of what's in expectations and what's in
the market's reaction is the reflection
problem. that if they think that the Fed
is going to succeed,
then
you could see conditions loosen,
>> but that wouldn't be a reason that the
Fed should raise necessarily because
they're premised on thinking that it's
going to work. That's what I was saying
before and I kind of now think in the
same way. It might be an indication,
but if you just look at rates and you
look at kind of the traditional
credit channels of monetary policy, I
still think that rates are relatively
restrictive. And so that's why I say if
you start to see deterioration in the
labor market, you start to see layoffs
going up and it starts looking more like
a the turning point in the labor market,
then I think we're going to have to
seriously contemplate cutting of rates.
If we're in an environment where we're
actually in pretty stable full
employment and the only thing that's
happening is population is making the
break even monthly jobs number 40,000
instead of 100,000
and inflation is going up in a bunch of
categories that are not tariff related.
Uh now we got to be a little more
circumspect.
[Music]
So I want to ask you a question. It's
something that I'm very increasingly
interested in and want to talk to a lot
more people about etc. But there are
aspects of this economy that as you say
may kind of resemble 2018, 2019 etc. One
thing that strikes me as very different
is the long-term rate and and the
implied therefore what people will call
the the neutral rate or whatever and
maybe rate cuts are coming soon but the
market is not expecting a deep cutting
cycle of that terminal rates. What's
changed? What's the fundamental
difference in 2025 verse 2018 such that
for the Fed to hit its 2% inflation
target the market is pricing in so much
higher rates than what it had
anticipated prior to co
>> I don't I should ask you you've talked a
lot of people
>> I'm asking you you're there no I'm not
>> I would say there's one way to look at
that that if you asked historically
which of those is weird
>> 2018 2019 is what's weird you know what
I mean like this the long rates now are
look very
>> very similar to kind of historical
patterns.
>> There's a whole tremendous almost
industry in research trying to diagnose
that and that bleeds into the question
of are we going back to
super low rates, ultra low rates because
is it global savings glut? Is there
something happening with productivity?
Do they think demand is going to be low?
Is there a feeling that Treasury is
going to have to issue so much debt? I
mean, there's been a big increase in
debt to GDP ratios worldwide. I do find
informative this increase in loan rates
is not exclusive to the US.
>> You see it in a lot of countries. So, I
don't I don't totally know. Mhm.
>> There's probably some of many of those
explanations. And for whatever reason,
what the market thinks the Fed is going
to do in short rates does seem to have a
outsized impact on 30-year rates. So,
that's part of it is probably just
reflecting how steep or how shallow a
path do they think the Fed is going to
take. So just going back to inflation
for a second. You've mentioned a couple
times now that you're worried about
maybe, you know, tariff induced
inflation in goods starting to seep into
services. Can you talk a little bit more
about how you see that channel actually
working? And then also, you're head of
the seventh district and you have some
interesting states in there. You've got
Michigan, which still makes cars. You've
got Iowa, which has farmers. like what
are you seeing in terms of the pass
through from goods to services there?
>> Okay, these are both important topics
for us to think through. Let's go
backwards in order. The seventh district
headquartered in Chicago is the most
manufacturing intensive of all the
districts and by far the most auto
production of all the districts.
It's one of the big agricultureheavy
districts, but Kansas City, Minneapolis,
there there's a couple of others. I
would say in the runup to April 2nd and
through April 2nd into May almost to
June, they their hair was on fire.
>> I mean, this is going to wipe us out. If
anything's like the rates of what they
just announced, the auto suppliers that
we had small margins to begin with,
we're going to die. we we don't know you
we don't know what's going to happen.
That's why I was getting amped up about
it at the time
as we kind of got some clarity on what
the rates were going to be and
particularly when they began exempting
if it's USMCA compliant it's not going
to apply for a bunch of intermediate
goods it's not going to apply
commer influence
I would say as I talk to people now for
manufacturing and for agriculture
they're still in that space in
agriculture. They were particularly
heartened by as some of the negotiations
got concluded, even if they weren't
going back to no tariffs,
the fact that they were going to
something that would not lead to
retaliation was a very big thing for
agriculture because a lot of their
biggest markets are overseas.
I was just recently in Iowa though
there's still nervous in that space that
in some ways the damage is already done
and it takes a long time to build up
these export relationships
and if you smash that and they start
buying soybeans from Brazil that even if
you go back to zero tariffs they might
have already set it up. So there is like
a nagging that the longer run impact
will be different than the shortrun
impact. But I would characterize
shortrun impact scaled down from I
always get the defcons backward. Defcon
five is the worst. Right. So
>> is that
>> I thought defcon one was the worst.
>> Everybody says
>> how often are we declaring Defcon?
>> Whatever it is
there was a high defcon
>> a bad defcon. dangerous devcon as high
as you could be and now it's gone back
not background noise but the sentiment
like we can live with this if this is
what it is as long as this stops when
we're we're not going to face new ones
>> we can deal with this now that said it
sort of goes to your second to your
original
>> defcon 1 is the highest state of
military right now
>> defcon 1 is the highest so they were at
defcon 1 and we're back to defcon on
five.
>> I just looked that up.
>> Okay.
>> All right. I I I add it backward, which
is embarrassing because I'm always like,
"No, no." You know, that's the that's
the opposite. But now I I opposite it
myself. Yeah.
>> Yeah. I get I've done that.
>> Okay. So, the question about what is the
mechanism that the tariff inflation
turns into services inflation?
Permit me a slight detour. Mhm.
>> What is the mechanism that tariffs turn
into inflation of goods
>> as opposed to just a one-time price
increase?
>> Because there is an argument that for
the platonic ideal of a theoretical one
and done tariff,
>> it's just a one-time price increase. So
no matter what it is, just look through
it,
>> right? And a one-time price increase,
just to be clear, doesn't count as
inflation under traditional economic
frameworks
>> because basically if you go measure
inflation, inflation would be high for
one year.
>> Yeah.
>> And then the inflation would go away.
But that was the very argument of team
transitory in 2021 was yes, here this
thing hits supply. We're going to let
bygones be bygones. will eat the
inflation for one year and then it's
going to go away. Now remember this is
for a oneandone tariff and this is not
one and this is not done. So let's be a
little more circumspect of just saying
hey theoretically it's just going to go
away. We learned in COVID that if it's a
big enough impact on the supply chain
and especially if it's going industry A
to industry B, industry B makes inputs
for C, that process takes a lot longer
than we thought it would in 2019 and
2020. When we got to 2021, we're like,
yeah, hey, it'll fix itself, you know,
probably six months. That was the
argument of transitory. So I'm a little
concerned about just the impact of
tariffs on goods inflation itself
lasting longer than we wanted to and
people getting mixed up. You'll recall
the perfectly valid arguments in 21 and
22 and into 23 where people said it
doesn't matter if it's supply shock
induced inflation. If it's high for too
long, it's going to fold into
expectations and then we'll never get
rid of it. That didn't prove true this
last time, but if people are more
attuned to price increases, it could.
And we just got to be careful on that
front. Now ask the question, how does it
turn into services inflation? One part,
what if the services inflation isn't
coming from tariffs? Okay, so that's the
the danger of services inflation is you
kind of can't really give a simple
mechanism of why services inflation
would be rising. The new month of
services inflation was quite terrible
and some part of that are non-market
determined. So I put a little less
weight on those but it wasn't good. That
probably the mechanisms that you think
through how would tariffs cause that. I
think you'd be hardressed to figure out
how it would cause it. But that doesn't
make you feel better. That makes you
feel worse because it's like whoa whoa
wait a minute. Maybe some inflationary
dynamic was never put out and you ever
like make the campfire
>> and it's like ah yeah it's done and then
you look way it's it's back it's back on
fire again. We can't let that happen.
We've been four and a half years above
the target. We were making progress. Now
we've stopped making progress.
If it's spreading into services
inflation this immediately it's probably
not coming from tariffs. the other
mechanisms. How does it move into
services inflation
is sort of wage price spiraling where
people say, "Well, I think prices are
going to go up, so I'm I'm going to be
that much more aggressive in my wage
negotiations with the employer."
>> The only reason I'm hesitating to go
down this lane is then you're probably
going to say, "Well, what about wages?
Are wages compatible with 2% inflation?"
And you can't answer that until you know
what the productivity growth rate is,
which has been one of the bright spots.
But that's actually my one of my bigger
fears about the tariffs is there's a
long literature of research in economics
showing you raise tariffs, especially on
components, supplies, it drives down
productivity growth.
>> Yeah. Tracy and I were in Alaska
recently and I feel like we heard
multiple ways whether it's like the
company's making tubular goods for the
oil patch out there and that's going to
make it increase break evens whether
it's like just the uncertainty
>> just doing the paperwork for customs
sounds like a huge lift.
>> Okay. It sounds like a productivity
destroying you know factor.
>> I have one last question and I'm turning
this into my question that I ask every
Fed president that we can uh talk Is
that why Tracy is rolling her eyes?
>> Yeah, probably.
>> I wasn't rolling my eyes.
>> This is This is my
>> theoretical question, but I think it
might be important down the line. Why
are dissents rare at the uh FOMC?
>> Why are dissents rare? I I haven't I've
only been there a short time. Fed years
are like reverse dog years or something
like you'd be there seven years. They're
like, "Ah, he's the new guy." Okay. So,
I'm coming up on three years.
>> Yeah.
>> There have been some dissents. I
>> can I tell you what I'm trying to get
at?
>> Yeah.
>> At some point the chair is going to be
replaced. And what I'm trying to
understand is when there's the new guy
is in that position,
>> to what degree does the fact that most
of the time the voting members align
with Powell? How much of it is the fact
that you more or less think about the
economy in roughly similar ways with and
looking at the same data? And how much
is it about Powell has done a good job
of
>> navigating? Yeah. Navigating the board.
And so this is why I'm asking the
question because I'm thinking about what
those dynamics are going to be.
>> It's more the latter. I feel like it's
more the latter. You know the rules. I'm
not allowed to speak for anybody else.
Speak for the committee. Speak for the
chair. You know, I'm a longtime fan of
Jay Pal. I think he's a first ballot
hall of fame fed chair and he has a
great judgment. He has also
navigated
a pretty diverse set of worldviews on
that committee. That's what makes me
feel it's less the first thing.
Everybody just has the same world view.
You can see from a minute
>> that that's not true. People have
different worldviews.
He's been remarkably skilled at whether
it's through statements, whether it's
through like what's what's written on
the page that everybody you coming from
different sides, but you can agree. Yes,
I agree with that. And I think that's
why there are fewer
>> Yeah.
>> descents, but in the time I've been
there, there have been two at the last.
No, I know. Yeah. Yeah. Can I ask in
general, what are the vibes like right
now when you guys are getting together?
>> Is Joe going to roll his eyes? That one.
The presidents
get together pretty frequently. The
presidents of the reserve banks get
together pretty frequently. We have a
conference of presidents. There are a
whole bunch of operational things that
we have to do and we're a quirky bunch
and is usually the vibe is pretty fun
from that. The FOMC meeting itself is
much more formal
>> and it's probably secret information for
me to tell you what the vibes are. If
it's not stated in the minutes what the
vibes are probably not supposed there's
a normal way for that to be expressed if
it was going to be expressed.
>> Austin Goulby, thank you so much for
coming back.
>> Always a pleasure. Before you guys were
ever famous, I was in here. I was friend
of the show before.
>> That's right. No, that was fantastic.
And definitely won't be the last time we
have you on the show.
>> Thank you so much.
>> Thank you.
[Music]
Tracy, it really is pretty striking the
degree to which it feels like the rate
cut question is not settled at all. No,
not at all.
>> Not at all. And at this point, I mean, I
guess we have to talk to more Fed
presidents, but it does seem like maybe
the market has gotten a little ahead of
itself in terms of expectations. Again,
we're recording this on Thursday, August
21st, and we're going to get the PAL
speech tomorrow. So, who knows what he's
going to say. Maybe markets will
recalibrate their expectations after
that. But you do hear a lot of
convincing arguments for why you should
look through things like weaker
payrolls, right? I really really liked
the four horsemen of truth and this idea
that in the time of volatile population
measures you want to look at rates. I'm
going to I'm going to like remember that
that it was very clearly articulated by
Austin there. So like vacancy rates,
hiring rates, firing rates, these are
the things that actually give us clean
signal across the cycle when population
levels are in flux. Well, Pal made a
similar argument in the questions after
the last meeting, right? Didn't he say
like he's looking at the unemployment
rate because he thinks that's more
meaningful at a time when you are having
these changes?
>> Yeah. No, I I do think um I have to I
have to actually take that. Yes, I have
to internalize this a little.
>> I could be hallucinating statements from
Pal because that's been has remained
fairly low and I think that's important.
But I like Austin's point is like that
he said at the end
>> that if you can't tie sort of the
services inflation in some way to the
tariff that's even like the fact that we
don't have a good story for it like if
you have a good story for it that's one
thing but this idea that's like well
what if this is just that ember that
didn't go out you like throw a cigarette
in the trash or whatever and there's
that little spark or that like that is a
little bit more ominous.
>> Yeah. And I do think like the starting
level is important here. So, you have to
remember the Fed spent the past 3 years
fighting inflation. It's still not down
to 2%. And everyone has higher prices on
their minds. Like, we've all experienced
it at this point. And so, the concern is
that like the impulse to raise prices
and tolerate more high prices is uh is
higher than it once was. I think that's
important. It doesn't get discussed
enough potentially. All right. Shall we
leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the
OddLotss podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest
Austin Goulsby at Austin Goulsby. Follow
our producers Carmen Rodriguez at Kerman
Arman, Dashel Bennett at Dashbot, and
Kale Brooks at Kalebrooks. For more
OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlotss
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes. And you can chat about
all of these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
And if you enjoy OddLots, if you want us
to interview all the Fed presidents and
win a prize, then please leave us a
positive review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes absolutely adree.
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
Yeah.
[Music]
Hey.